# Query Message

**In this section you will learn how a user query messages on the forum application.**

## Query

The `Query` method is used to query the application state for specific information. It allows clients to request data from the blockchain without submitting a transaction.

The `Query` method is responsible for retrieving data from the application state based on the provided query parameters. The query parameters can be specified in the `RequestQuery` object, which typically includes information such as the query path, query data, and any additional options or parameters.

The application is expected to interpret the query parameters and return the corresponding data in a `ResponseQuery` object. The response may include the requested data, error codes, or any other relevant information based on the application's implementation.

The Query method is particularly useful for retrieving specific information from the blockchain, such as account balances, transaction history, or any other data stored in the application's state.

**Following is the blurb of code for the `Query` function:**

```go
func (app ForumApp) Query(ctx context.Context, query *abci.RequestQuery) (*abci.ResponseQuery, error) {
	resp := abci.ResponseQuery{Key: query.Data}

	// Parse sender from query data
	sender := string(query.Data)

	if sender == "history" {
		messages, err := model.FetchHistory(app.state.DB)
		if err != nil {
			return nil, err
		}
		resp.Log = messages
		resp.Value = []byte(messages)

		return &resp, nil
	}
	// Retrieve all message sent by the sender
	messages, err := model.GetMessagesBySender(app.state.DB, sender)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}

	// Convert the messages to JSON and return as query result
	resultBytes, err := json.Marshal(messages)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}

	resp.Log = string(resultBytes)
	resp.Value = resultBytes

	return &resp, nil
}
```

**Explanation of code:**

`Query` function queries the blockchain. It takes a context and a query as input and returns a response or an error.

If the query data is equal to "history", it fetches the history of messages from the application's state database and returns it as a response. Otherwise, it retrieves all messages sent by the sender specified in the query data, converts them to JSON, and returns them as the query result.

*Tip: The function `Query` can still fetch previous messages from a sender before it was banned. You can change this to delete all messages from a banned sender.*

---------------

*In the next session, you will learn about different [**models**](./5.model.md) and functions and how they are used in the Forum Application.*
